Your sense of contribution to the community
is
kind of rewarding, but basically it's just a lot of
confidence-building maneuvers, because that's
what we call things we did in the airplanes when you
learn to fly, and especially in jet fighters. But
it was confidence-building activities and
leadership activities and you learn how to work
with people and how to motivate people and I
learned early on that one of the best ways to
motivate people is just set a good example and be a
good example and most time people will follow and
then you don't have to use more persuasive means of
leadership if you don't have to. And besides, if
you have to use too much persuasion and
motivation, a lot of times if you're in a voluntary
type activity, you just turn to somebody else. And
if somebody's not pulling their share or making
promises that they don't keep or don't fulfill,
you just quit depending on them and associate with
people you can depend on. Let's go to academics. Do
you remember how you registered for the first
time? How'd you get into it? How did they know what
classes for you to get that first semester?
It seems like my first semester this year
It seemed like we went over to Sabisa Dining Hall
and you stood in lines at different tables
representing the different departments and the
different
courses within the departments.
You consulted with an academic advisor, and you
had a card that you went through and filled out as
you confirmed your different classes. And I don't
remember much about the details other than that
first semester was fairly easy because there were
so many core classes and basic classes that you had
to take. And it was just a matter of going through.
And yours was engineering? Right. It was
engineering for the first two years, right. Do you
remember some of those first semester classes? I
remember that in one of the
English classes I tested out of one of the first
composition and rhetoric classes one of the basic
ones and moved to an advanced class and in one of the
mathematics classes I tested out of one of the
basic ones and got to start to tell you I had a pretty
good academic background in Conroe. And English
and math were two of the classes where I tested out
of the first semester of the first courses.
even though the classes I took were maybe a little
more challenging than some of my contemporaries
did, I was pretty well prepared for it and didn't
have any real problems. I never was a straight A
student, but my, I believe it was my second
freshman semester, and then two other of my nine
semesters, I made distinguished student. But so I
was maybe a little above average, but not real high
academically. I always had to study quite a bit.
Things don't always come real easily. I don't have
photographic memory. I don't have a real high IQ. I
think it measured somewhere, I don't remember,
somewhere between 125 and 130.
I always had to study, had to do a lot of homework,
and I found that if I did and if I was very methodical
in the way I organized my studies and my note taking
and kept up with my reading and so forth, that I
could do okay. Where did you do that study? Mostly
in my dorm room, but sometimes if there were
activities and I knew that there were some turmoil
or something going on in the dorm that would be
distracting, I'd go to the library or maybe to the
MSC. Did you have special little places you found
in those two? Yeah, in the library, a lot of times
you'd be okay just in one of the big public study
desks. but then later on when you were really in a
crunch and really had to concentrate there were
little cubicles up in the stacks where you could
you could check out a number of books and you didn't
have to check them out you could just get the books
off the stacks once you learn the Dewey Decimal
System and how to find them you could get the books
you wanted you might have eight or ten books on a
shelf above the little cubicle and you could sit
there and then as you needed references or
bibliography or something you could pull them out
of the books and you could sit there and write a term
paper and then you didn't even have to complete it
in that sitting. You could leave it and then just
put a note on the desk occupied and put your name on
it and nobody would bother it and then I think there
was a time limit of two or three weeks or something
like that. If you hadn't finished your paper then
you might come back and find that your books had
been put back on the shelves in the stacks, and
you'd have to go back and get them, put them back
out, but most of the time when you got back there,
your books were still right there, and so you'd
just bring your notebook or your papers and
continue where you left off. That was a real good
system. If you were under stress or you just needed
to get away, sometimes you could use that as an
excuse and just go up there and put your head on the
desk and take a nap. Where in the MSC did you study?
down in the student programs areas, well
sometimes there were meeting rooms that were
unoccupied and unlocked that you could get into or
even if they were locked, if you asked somebody, a
lot of times, especially since I was known as an
active participant and a committee member,
you could get a key or get somebody to unlock one for
you and then you just lock it when you left. Did you
have early on some classes and or instructors that
were meaningful to you later?
Let's see. I'm trying
to remember who taught the, there was one of the
classes called and effective discourse,
and I'm trying to remember who taught that, but
that was one of my favorites, not only because it
taught methodical logic, taught the difference
between inductive and deductive, or subjective
and objective reasoning, And that's where I
learned to appreciate the search for truth and the
distinction between learning
for the sake of wisdom and learning for the sake of
manipulating the system where you learn the
difference between truth and propaganda. And
whereas in an academic situation, the classic
reason for a debate is for two sides to vigorously
explore the pros and cons, with the outcome being
to discover truths and fundamental principles of
life that everybody can live by and help everybody
improve themselves, in authoritarian systems,
the purpose of a debate is for one person to
annihilate their opponent and truth matters very
little and that became reinforced to me and became
very important to me a little bit later in life when
I had another little experience where I had to deal
with propaganda from a position of weakness for a
number of years and yet that class helped sustain
me considerably and that class especially
combined with my Judeo-Christian background I
was a born-again Christian Southern Baptist I'd
probably be what a lot of the PC crowd call a
fundamentalist nowadays but evangelical
Christian made a profession of faith when I was 10,
11, 12 years old and had always lived by that. That
coupled with everything I knew about our founding
fathers and the way that United States of America
was founded, history, government, politics,
political science, All of that made eminent sense
to me when you look at truth, the truth, whole
truth, and nothing but the truth, and then what
Jesus said, he's the truth, the way, and the life.
To me, truth trumps everything. Did those A&M
semesters, did they reinforce all those ideas?
Well, they helped. help develop them and
reinforce them. I think a lot of the reinforcement
came later. I think that was part of the
developmental period and learning that and
learning to appreciate that in a way that a lot of my
adult contemporaries still don't seem to
appreciate. As an engineering major, were there
some key engineering and or math science courses
that you recall? No just all of them helped
reinforce the idea that there is order in the
universe and I know as you get into really higher
levels there is the chaos theory and some of that
but that's way out on the fringes when you're
pressing the edges of the envelope of knowledge
and science and so forth but from the fundamental
standpoint There is order in the universe and I
think the same creator that
created spiritual laws and religious laws and
interpersonal relationship guidelines also
created the laws of nature that affect science,
mathematics, medicine, chemistry, all of those
things. And without order and predictability,
society could never progress. And I think it was
the Renaissance and the Reformation that brought
us out of the Dark Ages, where in the terms of human
evolution, where people began to realize
although it took many more generations to really
bring it to fruition that just because a dictator
or an authoritarian or an elite group or an
aristocratic family or something had power and
could dictate what
the rules and what the mores and things were going
to be didn't necessarily mean they were right. and
that scientists and academicians could
find truth and folks like Michelangelo and Dante
even though they might be unpopular or outcast or a
prize in their own time they knew truth and knew how
to to express it and fortunately in many cases we
have the record of what they thought even when it
was a minority opinion at the time or unpopular or
might even get them persecuted like Martin
Luther's theses. You know history proved that
they were right and truth prevailed even though
the ruling authorities at the time
not only didn't go along with it, didn't like it, in
some cases persecuted and martyred the people for
it. For you and your buddies, what did you all think
were the unwritten rules about class attendance
and class behavior and so forth?
Most of that was set by each individual instructor
and some of them made it very clear that you would be
there for every class and for every class you
missed if it was unexcused or if you didn't come by
and make amends or apologize or offer the reason
for it, a valid reason, that that was half a letter
grade. Did you do it regularly? Yes, I did. Not only
because it was demanded. I expected it of myself. I
just don't think you can keep up in a fast-moving
environment. And like I said, I'm not a whiz kid
that can cut five or six classes and then cram for an
exam the night before or maybe listen to a few notes
or maybe scan a CliffsNotes the night before a test
and still ace it. I can't do that. I have to... What
about, were there ever any pranks in class? Did
y'all, y'all didn't... Not any that stand out.
There may have been some occasionally. I would
like to go back to that one. This was significant to
me, that class on logic and effective discourse.
When I went in to take the final exam, it was a two or
three part exam. And in fact, I think
One of the parts was even before the final exam day.
So when we came in there was a one part had already
been turned in. There was another part that was
done the first hour and another part that was done
the second hour and then the third hour was where
you could finish up anything you wanted and turn it
in. Well at the end of the first hour I turned my
paper in, and it was more of a true-false type, a
quick one. And then the next one was a series of
essays. And so I turned it in, and the prof, about 20
minutes into the next session, he said, Mr. Ray, he
said, you've done well enough that if you leave
right now, you'll get a B in the class. And I said,
how strong will it be? Is it close enough that if I do
well on this last one, I can get an A? And he thought
for a minute. He wasn't expecting that. He thought
for a minute, and he said, it's possible. So I
stayed that third and finished those essays and
turned them in and I did get an A in the class. And I
don't know if my work was really that good or not but
just the fact that I had turned down that
opportunity to quit and take what I had to try to
work for an A signaled to him that I was interested
in it and I guess I did well enough on that that he
gave me an A in it anyway. So you and your buddies
went to class regularly. How many hours did you
normally take per semester?
17 or 18. In fact, I think 18 was more the norm, and
occasionally 19 or 20. And I think the lightest
load I ever had, excluding my last semester, in
which case I took 15 or 16. But I think prior to that,
of the first eight semesters, I think I had one that
had 17. And all the others were 18 or more. You know
that 12 is now considered by most students to be
a... And when I see that and I thought, oh my
goodness, this... This trend toward social
promotion and feel good promotions and
artificial self-esteem is really getting out of
hand. I really worry about the future of our
civilization if this trend continues because if
you don't have high standards and maintain them
and work toward them, you're not prepared to face
life. And I think it's a huge mistake among the
educational communities and the teachers'
unions and the educational curriculum directors
and all of these folks that have been preaching
situational ethics and moral relativism and all
of that other stuff. They're really undermining
the foundations of our civilization. I really
feel strongly about that, but I'm not really sure
what I can do about it other than mention it as often
as I can, and as a matter of fact, those kind of
distinctions is what caused our marriage to break
up. You never thought about dropping out of A&M,
transferring. When that first year was over, how
did you feel it had gone?
I felt like it had gone very well. I mean, there had
been some ups and downs. There had been some little
incidents in the dorm where I'd gotten crossways
with some of my classmates over some of their
activities and one
of the times that one of the issues was porno flicks
in the dormitory and I
guess in a way I was a little bit naive and maybe a
little bit prudish but at the same time there were
some practical aspects of that is that Once you let
your mind wander over into those areas, it's very
distracting to accomplishing serious goals and
purposes in life. That next year, was it better to
be a sophomore? Oh, absolutely. So much, so much
better. Because now you could be in charge and
there was much less harassment, although the
responsibility was still... Even if you had
determined from the way you were treated as a fish
that you were going to be more enlightened in your
leadership,
you still had to be really diligent because you
didn't want the outfit to fall down. Sometimes you
had to be pretty tough on guys that were either slow
learners or indifferent to really a search for
excellence and success and being the best you
could be as an outfit and as an individual. So
sometimes you have to, some people only
understand a harassing type motivation. Most
people, however, respond to leadership by
example and will take instruction and correction
the way it's intended. What do you think that Fish,
your sophomore year, thought about you as a
sophomore?
I don't know, I never got water ballooned or babo
bombed, and
I've always had good relationships with the guys,
not really close friendships or anything, but
sometimes guys will write to me, especially when I
came back from Vietnam, calls and letters. You had
a different roommate. Right.
those undergraduate years, to whom did you turn
for advice, if you needed particularly academic
advice? Well,
first thing I was going to say, the advice in
general. I was still active in the First Baptist
Church and College Station and the Baptist
Student Union. Cliff Harris was the director of
the Baptist Student Union in those days.
the folks at Sunday school class teachers, I
always felt like any time, especially any moral
issues, like I went over and talked to a Sunday
school teacher who referred me to the pastor who at
that time was
Cecil Sherman.
And I guess this was my sophomore year, concerning
the porno flicks and some things that were going on
in the dorm that I didn't like. And I went over and
talked to him about how you stand up for what's
right, but at the same time not break your
relationships with your outfit and your
classmates and your squadron mates and so forth.
And so that was a very helpful outlet.
Academically,
Dean Ransdell was one of our squadron advisors.
And in engineering, there was a guy who had either
an injured or withered arm. Crawford? I think
Crawford later on became was a dean but at that time
he was a I guess a professor and was an academic
advisor so you know when if you if you felt like you
were in trouble and weren't sure whether you're
going to make it through without getting an F or D in
the class sometimes you could go and and sometimes
he could contact the prof and say well you know is
this guy just not trying or is he is it a little too
difficult or and sometimes they can maybe could
recommend maybe some extra sessions. I never got
something for nothing and I'm glad I didn't
because I think that that sets up real bad habits
for the future. Were there supposedly some easy
courses then where everybody made a high grade?
Oh, the physical education. Some folks claim that
the military science courses were cush courses,
as they called them. And there were some that had a
reputation that if you felt like you wanted one or
needed one to get your GPA up, you could take it. And
I had heard about those, but I don't think I was ever
tempted to sign up for one like that. What about at
the other extreme? Were there some courses that
everybody thought it was real tough? Yeah, there
was chemistry. There were several chemistry
classes. There were some calculus classes. But
here again, I figured that if they're tough, that
means that it's important to know the stuff, and
you've got to know it. If you're not willing to put
that effort into it, if you don't really like it,
then you better find another profession. And
then there were some instructors that were
sometimes a little bit difficult to deal with. And
one that I didn't get along with very well at all was
Ivy League Taylor. A lot of folks liked him because
he didn't really demand much day to day. But he was
very demanding on the tests. And it was subtle, and
it was difficult. It was almost like you were being
tricked into being
lazy. Because he'd just come in. He'd sit on the
desk and tell stories. And the reading
assignments were all kind of general and not very
specific. The learning objectives were not very
specific. And I like things to be structured. I
like to know in advance. And it's not that I want
somebody to teach the test to me, but I want
somebody to structure some learning objectives
so that I'll know as I go along whether I'm meeting
these. When something is just so... nebulous that
there's no form or no apparent function to it other
than just remembering details of who did what to
whom at a certain part in history if it doesn't have
some significance to contributing to an idea or a
principle or a growth or an evolution of a system of
government or a system of philosophy and if I think
that something is going in that direction and the
prof is not interested he's just interested in
anecdotal details and a lot of details sometimes
frivolous detail then I don't it's hard for me to
relate to that and as a result of the I think maybe I
had two D's and one F in my whole career at A&M. All
the rest were mostly B's, occasional C's, and
probably had more A's than I had C's. But the two D's
and the F were all in history classes. Because
history was, if it were not structured, it was just
difficult for me to relate to it. And then when I
tried to put a structure to it, sometimes I was
incorrect, or sometimes I had misinterpreted
something, or maybe I was reaching a conclusion
that maybe wasn't evident from that particular
example in history. So for some reason, I just
didn't do well in the history courses, although I
took enough of them that by the time toward the end
of my sophomore year, realized I didn't want to do
engineering for the rest of my life and at that
point I wasn't really sure what I wanted to do but I
was being pulled maybe toward a pre-law degree
maybe going to law school or maybe going into
full-time Christian ministry so I knew English
and liberal arts would be a good background for
either of those in fact the pre-law curriculum and
the English curriculum when I went back and
compared the text I was trying to decide what my new
major would be they were pretty similar but I chose
English as my new major because it offered the most
undesignated electives so I had a lot of places to
park a lot of my science and math and engineering
courses that otherwise
I would lose if I had picked any other major. And
even at that, I had to go one extra semester because
I had a lot of courses that just wouldn't transfer.
I had enough hours, but they weren't the right
ones. Major in English and a minor in history. So I
ended up with a minor in history in spite of the fact
that some of my history courses didn't count for
credit. Were there some special teachers you had
in that major? that you now look back on and realize
they were important?
I believe you're the only one that I can remember
specifically. I remember Ivy League Taylor, but I
got a negative feeling about that. And then there
was one other history
Well, I can't remember the names, so
apparently... What about over in English? In
English,
Harrison Hurth, John Paul Abbott.
Those are the only two names that just off the top of
my head... I do remember one particular incident
in...
Yeah.